# Announcing NENO v2
*2022/08/30*

I am happy to announce the release of NENO v2. This major release took months of effort and thinking on how to improve NENO even further.

When I started developing NENO [about 2.5 years ago](https://github.com/SebastianZimmer/neno/commit/8bdc74b766f0598f0f8132c7d4a528f0ec94f2a7), I wanted to quickly be able to create and link notes. Over time, I noticed things that work well and things that don't work so well. The latter ones I tried to improve with v2.

## A new editor

The main focus of this release is the note editor. In v1 it was powered by a block-based WYSIWYG editor with its own JSON data format. As much as I like WYSIWYG editing for being beginner-friendly, I found the user experience was lacking consistency and comfort. Simple text-editing functions that you'd take for granted did not work. Also, the editor brought its own UI which didn't fit well into the rest of the app's design. So I started looking out for other WYSIWYG editors. Among other solutions, I found [Lexical](https://lexical.dev/), which is an open-source project backed by Meta. Lexical stuck out to me because it is not just an editor but a composable text editing framework. If you want to implement your own rich text editor, I recommend to check it out. They have a cool community. I even built a NENO prototype with Lexical and it looked promising. But since Lexical also brought its own JSON-based schema, I feared that I just switched from one vendor lock-in to another one. What if I wanted to take my notes to another application and edit them there? And what is the most simple editing tool you can think of? Right, a text editor. So why not using a plain text format? I wanted to go with Markdown but then I found out about a plain text markup format called [Subtext](https://github.com/subconsciousnetwork/subtext), which has a simpler structure and is easier to implement.

## Subtext

The subtext format is a very simple plaintext markup format for thought, think of it as Markdown for simply structured notes. One of the best features of Subtext is that it is block-based, which means you can do a lot of things with it as [blocks are composable](https://github.com/subconsciousnetwork/subtext). NENO v1 already has a block-based editor and I always liked having blocks for easily parsing the content, analysing it and displaying interesting metadata. A block-based format like Subtext seems like a natural fit for NENO. There was just one minor thing I would want to have in addition, which is multiline blocks. In Subtext, every line is a block. But as a software developer, I take notes with (multiline) code snippets and terminal commands on a daily basis, so some blocks should be multiline.

## Subwaytext

So I created a subtext dialect. I am calling it subwaytext for now for lack of a better idea and creativity. This is how a subwaytext document looks like:

````
# Heading

Some
multiline
text

- An unordered
- list

1. An ordered list
2. another item

/file:video.mp4 Video of people dancing

https://example.com/info Website with fascinating content

```
// and here we have some multiline code
function renderSubwaytext({input, options}) {
   return output;
}
```
````

The content of every note you create with NENO is now saved as a subwaytext document which NENO renders as visual blocks that look very similar to the blocks in v1. You can seamlessly switch between the text editor and the rendered blocks (press `CTRL`/`CMD`+`.`). You can find the subwaytext implementation including a test [here](https://github.com/SebastianZimmer/neno/tree/main/lib/subwaytext). I could imagine that view mode and edit mode will more and more melt together in future NENO versions, i. e. having a WYSIWYG subtext editor. I also intend this new format to lay the foundation of a better interoperability of NENO. The plan is for notes including their metadata to become even more plain text and less JSON. One of the most important design principles of NENO is to not be a walled garden!

By the way, the new editor implementation also significantly increases perceived performance.

## Files are now first-class citizens

Besides all the editor changes, there are other improvements: Files used to be able to exist only as parts of notes and could not be transferred or copied from one note to another without hassle. With v2, files are not bound to one note per se, but can be added to multiple notes. If a note is deleted, the file including its name and all its properties stay and can be reused. However, when you upload a file, it will be automatically added as a slashlink in your active note.

## Voronoy hub visualization

You can now visualize the hubs of your graph as a voronoy visualization. This might be useful to get a higher-level overview over your knowledge graph. [You just want to stay away from your mental squeeze point](https://notes.linkingyourthinking.com/Cards/MOCs+Overview).

## Migration

NENO v2 includes a note transformation tool that is automatically started when you first run NENO v2 with your v1 database. Make sure you create a backup of your data before updating. Some data will not be taken over in the new format, e. g. downloaded link descriptions.

You can start with NENO right now (no install or login necessary, data will be saved on your hard drive): https://sebastianzimmer.github.io/neno

That's it for now. [I'd love to get feedback from you](https://sebastianzimmer.github.io). Until then, happy note-taking!
